# Object Oriented Design and C++
## Introduction

### History of C++
C++ is a multi-paradigm, general-purpose programming language designed by Bjarne Stroustrup in 1983. It was designed with a bias towards lower-level system programming; this includes embedded and resource-constrained systems.

One can program in many different styles: *object-oriented*, *procedural*, *imperative* and *generic*. It allows the developer to utilise many key features of object-oriented design, such as inheritance, encapsulation, and polymorphism. It also allows for more high-level, dynamic memory allocation and control compared to C.

The language is similar to C in design, and in fact there is a degree of interoperability between both languages as C++ started life as a fork from an early, pre-standardised C language. Some C-based functions, like `printf()`, can be used with little difficulty. However, **C++ is not a strict superset of C**. Most non-trivial C programs **will not** compile with a C++ compiler without some modification.

For example, here is code that is acceptable and valid when compiled to C, but will not compile with C++, and will throw errors:
```cpp
void* ptr;
// C++ checks type-safety much more rigorously, hence this implicit cast between pointer types is not acceptable here.
int* i = ptr;
```

Some code will also exhibit differing behaviour in C and C++, even if both segments are the same and compile successfully. For this reason, interoperability and migration between C and C++ must be handled with caution.

#### C++ Compilation
There are two main compilers for C++ - GCC (GNU Compiler Collection) and LLVM/Clang. `g++`, the compiler executable, will usually default to one of these depending on OS and environment - for example, on Linux this is GCC, on macOS this is Clang.

* There usually is a difference in executable bytecode produced by GCC and Clang.
* Clang can be faster to compile, and can **occasionally** produce faster code. Other times, optimisations performed by GCC can often make code operate better on **some hardware**.
* Clang is newer than GCC, and acts as a front end to LLVM - a very powerful and versatile intermediate code generator and low-level virtual machine. However, since the compiler system is not as mature as GCC, it can sometimes produce slightly less robust code.
* Clang is arguably much better than GCC for debugging and diagnostics, although this may change.

### General C++ design and operation

* C++ builds upon C, adding object-oriented functionality to programs.

* Program execution starts with `main`, with a return type of `int`.

* Sometimes, external header files may need to be included in the program if functions are used which are outside of the main program's scope. `#include` is used to include these files.

* C++ includes support for the `string` data type. This can be used by the preprocessor directive `#include <string>`. For backward-compatibility reasons, C-style `char*` can also be used as strings. The native type is recommended though for C++.

* Constants can be defined by `const`, like C

* `cin` and `cout` make accessing standard I/O streams easy

An example of a C++ program is this:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char const *argv[]) {
  cout << "Hello World" << endl;
  return 0;
}
```

*NB: The main function can have zero arguments, but this example includes arguments to allow parsing of additional command line options to the program.*

### How to compile?
* Command line, with g++ (GCC/Clang)
* With a **Makefile**
* IDE with built-in compilation tools (e.g. Xcode, MS Visual Studio etc)

With C++, a source file is compiled to an object file, which is then linked with any declared libraries to form an executable.

To compile/link a C++ file, we can invoke `g++` on the command line with:
- `g++ -c hello.cpp` -> compiles to `hello.o`
- `g++ hello.o -o hello` -> compile object file to `hello` executable
- `g++ -o hello hello1.cpp hello2.cpp` -> generate executable with multiple source files

Options can be passed to the C++ compiler, such as:
* `-Wall` : turn on all warnings
* `-g` : debugging flag
* `-I` : Instruct GCC to look in a specific folder for header files
* `-L` : Instruct GCC to look in a specific folder for library files

GCC can also handle additional code optimisation techniques which can greatly impact performance on certain devices. Common options include:
* `-On` : Level n optimisation (`-O1` being least optimised, `-O3` being most optimised)
* `-Ofast` : Special optimisation level, enables all `-O3` optimisations and disables optimisations that are not valid for all standard-compliant programs. Can be slightly less stable than `-O3`.
* `-Os` : Special optimisation level, enables all `-O2` optimisations that do not increase code size, generates size-optimal executables
* `-ffast-math` : Allows for transformations to be used to result in correct code, but may not conform to IEEE standards. Use with care.
* `-fgcse` : Optimises loop performance, moving load/store calls outside of the loop body to reduce execution step count.

### What's a Makefile?
A Makefile is a file describing how to create an executable from multiple source files. A Makefile can be used in the compilation/linking stage by invoking `make` followed by aliases defined in the makefile.

A Makefile usually includes:
* A target (file)
* Dependencies
* Additional options passed to the compiler

It can be helpful to add a `clean` directive to the Makefile:
```
clean:
  \rm *.o *~ <program alias/name>
```

Macros can also be included in a Makefile, to simplify editing source file locations and compiler options.

## Key Concepts of Object-Oriented Design
Object Oriented Design makes use of four main principles:
* Abstraction
  * The idea of generalising a concept to reduce its complexity and improve efficiency
  * For example, `ArrayList` and `LinkedList` can be abstracted as types of `List`
* Encapsulation
  * Enforcing data access through approved accessor/mutator methods
  * Assures predictable ways of getting data
  * Cannot access the data of an object directly
* Inheritance
  * A class can inherit methods and data from a superclass
  * Encourages code reuse without code duplication
  * For example, `LinkedList` and `ArrayList` utilise methods defined in `List`, but they also extend `List` to add custom functionality
* Polymorphism
  * Provision of a single interface to multiple types
  * Describe ways of doing some generic function, and then this can be applied to specific objects.
  * Generics and polymorphic typecasting (subtyping)

## C++ language features
### Inline functions
Like C, C++ has support for *inline functions*. These are normal C/C++ functions that are prefixed with the `inline` keyword. It acts as a compiler directive that suggests that the compiler substitute the code defined in the `inline` function into the address of the function call itself. This saves a function call, and can result in better performance.

* Inline functions are suited to very short (either one or two) line functions, such as accessors of a class' private data, since the computation cost of the function call overhead would influence the function's overall performance significantly.

However, the `inline` function **does not force the compiler to inline**. It merely acts as a suggestion. Some compilers do have a compilation flag to force inline all functions, even ones that aren't explicitly defined as `inline`. But, performing inline expansion optimisation on functions where it isn't necessarily needed may not be possible, or it may hinder performance.

* For example, virtual inline functions cannot be inlined if they are called virtually. A direct call to a virtual inline function does allow the function to be inlined, though.

### Strings
Since C++ was designed to be fairly backwards-compatible with C, it also includes support for C-style strings.

These are created either by the following:
* `char[]` : Character array, fixed length
* `char*` : Pointer to an *anonymous array* of characters, variable length

However, C-style strings must end with the null terminator character `\0`, so `n+1` bytes are needed to store a `n` length string *(assuming that UTF-8/ASCII is used)*

C++ has a native string data type. If compatibility with C is not required (no C code is ever called), use this over `char*`. It is easier to use and behaves in a much more expected manner.

### Pointers
Like C, C++ can utilise a **pointer**, which is something that **points to** a memory address that holds a value.

For example:
```c++
int num = 5; // variable holding '5'
int* num_addr = &num; // variable holding memory address of 'num'
```

* `&` means to get the address of a variable.
* The address of a variable is unknown until runtime, and due to modern operating systems and kernel-enforced ASLR, the address will be likely to change between process invocations.
* `*` means to dereference a pointer. This is the process of accessing the value at the memory address pointed to by the pointer.
* Accessing an array's members can be done with pointer arithmetic, *assuming that arrays are stored contiguously*. For example:
  ```c++
  int array[5] = {11, 9, 7, 3, 5};
  std::cout << &array[0]; // print memory address of 1st array element
  std::cout << array; // prints same as above
  std::cout << array[0]; // print 1st array element (11)
  std::cout << *(array + 1); // prints second array element (9)
  ```

  * Note here, that when defining `int array[5]`, `array` is actually just a pointer to the first element of the array itself. In other words, `array === &array[0]`.

  * Be careful with this. Incrementing a pointer outside of the bounds of an array, and then dereferencing it is **undefined behaviour**. It is difficult to predict what the program will do at this point. It may return garbage data, but may also trigger a *segfault* and get killed by the kernel.

#### Pointers: Segmentation fault
A segmentation fault, or *segfault*, is when the operating system is notified that a program is attempting to access a restricted area of memory.

Several years ago, a program utilising pointers perhaps could have accessed memory outside of the region that the OS/kernel allocates for the program. If the operating system did not have virtual memory management and address space protection, one could technically access data held by other programs, if one knows the location of said data beforehand. **This was a huge security risk.**

Nowadays, programs are allocated a region of memory and the processor MMU handles memory protection and access alongside the kernel. If a program attempts to access a memory location that is not in its defined region, a *segfault* (UNIX signal SIGSEGV) is triggered.

On most operating systems, if a segfault is triggered by a process then the kernel will most likely kill the process immediately. To the end user, it may look like the program has crashed.

Common causes of segmentation faults include:
* Dereferencing null pointers
* Attempting to access a memory space that does not exist
* Attempting to access memory that the program doesn't have rights to access
* Attempting to write to read-only/protected memory regions in RAM

### Inheritance modifiers
C++ is interesting, especially when compared to Java in that the programmer can determine the level of code access that a *derived (sub) class* has:

* `public`: Like Java - everyone is aware that the subclass inherits from the parent
* `protected`: Only the subclass and its children are aware that the subclass inherits from the parent
* `private`: Only the subclass is aware that it inherits from the parent; no one else is aware.

*NB: By 'is aware', I refer to 'acknowledge existence of, and thus is able to access'*

### Copy constructors
A copy constructor is a special constructor for creating a new object as a copy of an existing object. The compiler **implicitly generates** a copy constructor for each class; note however that this invokes a **shallow copy**.

A shallow copy creates a copy that shares a pointer to the same memory region, so both copies are modifying the same data. We can specify an **explicit copy constructor** as follows:

```c++
#include <algorithm>

class Array {
public:
  int size;
  int* data;

  explicit Array(int s) : size(s), data(new int[s]) {}
  ~Array { if (data != NULL) delete[] this->data; }

  // Explicit copy constructor
  Array(const Array& other) : size(other.size), data(new int[other.size]) {
    std::copy(other.data, other.data + other.size, data);
  }

};
```

This gives us a deep copy of `Array`, with both objects having their own data rather than sharing a reference.
