# Web App Development
## Introduction

Web applications:
* Are applications that provide a degree of interactivity
* Resemble a desktop application in look and feel, as well as function
* Utilise a client-server connection model, and store data in a data backend (public/private cloud)
* Are **responsive** (adapt UI depending on client device and screen resolution)
* Can be run as services *(SaaS)*

Modern web applications are commonly written in a dynamic and flexible programming language.
Ruby on Rails allows for this type of development.

### What is Ruby on Rails?
Ruby on Rails refers to a web application development framework that is built upon the Ruby language. It is completely server-side, and heavily utilises the model-view-controller design pattern to build applications.

Ruby on Rails also provides default structures for databases, web services, and web pages. It also encourages use of common web standards such as JSON and XML for data transport, as well as HTML/CSS and JavaScript for display and UI.

In addition to MVC, Ruby on Rails also encourages use of other common developmental practices and paradigms:
* Convention over Configuration - Decrease the number of decisions a developer makes when using the framework, but without losing flexibility
* Don't Repeat Yourself (DRY) - Reduce code repetition, encourage code reuse without duplication
* Active Record Pattern - Store in-memory object data in relational databases using object-relational mapping.

#### Model-View-Controller (MVC) Pattern
This design pattern is commonly used in applications that utilise a user interface. It divides an application into three interconnected parts.

* Model: The expression of the application behaviour with respect to the problem, including data and logic.
* View: Any representation of output of information, such as a chart, diagram or user input form.
* Controller: Bridges the Model and View; accepts input and translates this to commands for the Model or View.

MVC inherently encourages code reuse without duplication *(DRY)* and properly-documented and standardised data accessor and modifier techniques.

### The Ruby language
* Ruby was created by Japanese developer Yukihiro Matsumoto ("Matz") in 1995.
* Ruby is a *dynamic*, *reflective*, *object-oriented* and *general-purpose* programming language.
* Ruby has support for automatic memory management, type inference and dynamic class loading at runtime.

In Ruby, **everything is an object**. For example:
```ruby
3.times { puts "Hello World!"}
```
outputs this:

> Hello World!<br>
> Hello World!<br>
> Hello World!

A brief explanation of what's happening:
* The numeral `3` is an object, with type `FixNum`
* `FixNum` has a method `times`, which is a basic way of creating a loop
* `times` accepts a code block as an argument, which is `puts { "Hello World!" }`.

All Ruby methods return values, but the `return` keyword is optional. If omitted, a method for example will return the return value of the last command. This can be `nil` (Java/C++ equivalent of `void`), as is the case with `puts`.

### Ruby: Classes
An example of a very basic Ruby class:
```ruby
class Person
  # initialize() is the class constructor
  def initialize(name)
    # @ denotes an instance variable
    @name = name

    # @@ denotes a static (class) variable
    @@static_test = "Hi!"
  end

  # Getter for an instance variable
  def name
    # Returns the instance variable 'name'
    @name
  end

  # Setter for an instance variable
  def name=(new_name)
    @name = new_name
  end
end
```

That example class' methods can be accessed by:
```ruby
# Call new() to initialise a new object
person_object = Person.new('Alex')

# Should print 'Alex' to console
puts person_object.name

person_object.name('Ben')

# Should print 'Ben' to console
puts person_object.name

# Should print 'Hi!' to console
puts person_test.static_test
```

Inheritance from a superclass is performed by the `<` operator:
```ruby
# Duck is obviously an Animal
class Duck < Animal
```

## Web applications
* Usually follow 3-tier server-client architecture, but some are migrating to MVC-based architecture as well

Usually, a web application is composed of three parts:
1. Client tier
  * Displays output content to the user
  * Can be displayed with a web browser
  * Not all clients use web browsers though

2. Application tier
  * Serves requests from the client, and responds with appropriate information
  * Some of the logic of the application is here
  * Usually Ruby on Rails + a web server
    * Web servers: Apache, Microsoft IIS, nginx
    * Web application frameworks: Rails, Django, Tomcat

3. Data tier
  * Stores data (can be in object form)
  * Application tier controls this tier directly
  * Relies on a DB interface
    * MySQL, Postgres, Oracle SQL, Microsoft SQL
    * Also MongoDB, Firebase for NoSQL stores
  * Typically, this tier is separated from the application tier either by network isolation or geographic separation.
    * Backups and data redundancy plans are in place to protect client data
    * This tier could utilise cloud-based object storage, such as **Amazon S3 (AWS)** or **Microsoft Azure Blob Storage** to uphold the redundancy and geographic separation from the application tier

### Web state standards
#### CRUD
CRUD stands for four key operations that one can do with a client-server interface:
* Create
* Read
* Update
* Delete

These actions are common to a lot of different types of web apps, and these directly map to actions that can be performed by the data tier / model.

#### REST
REST stands for *Representational State Transfer*. It refers to a standardised way of providing interoperability between computer systems on the Internet. REST implements the CRUD client-server model directly, in the form of HTTP requests.

There are four main types of HTTP requests:
* HTTP GET: Obtain a resource from a server
  * Implements CRUD `Read`
* HTTP POST: Send a web form to a server
  * Implements CRUD `Create`
* HTTP PUT: Partially update a web resource on a server
  * Implements CRUD `Update`
* HTTP DELETE: Delete a resource from a server
  * Implements CRUD `Delete`

RESTful actions directly map to Rails MVC actions. A web browser isn't even needed to send HTTP requests like this. On UNIX-like operating systems, `curl` can do this:<br><br>
* GET request with
`curl https://google.com`
* POST request with
`curl -X POST --data "field1=value1&field2=value2" https://google.com`
* And so on for all of the RESTful actions.
